src/content/posts/deriving-types-from-data-typescript/index.mdx, before:

---
title: Deriving types from data in TypeScript
date: 2023-04-02
tags: [typescript]
---

A TypeScript pattern I like to use is to derive types from data. Types in
TypeScript only exist at build time (not runtime), so this pattern brings the
benefit of types being automatically linked to the runtime values they
represent.

# `typeof` operator

The heart of this pattern is the [`typeof`
operator](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/typeof-types.html#the-typeof-type-operator),
which gives us the type of a variable, for example:

```typescript twoslash
const hello = "hello";
type Hello = typeof hello;
//   ^?
```

# `const` vs `let`

The result of `typeof` will differ depending on how we declare our variable --
whether we used `const` or `let`.

As you could see, when we used `const`, the `Hello` type was the literal string
`"hello"` -- this is because a `const` variable can never be re-assigned later,
so it can only be `"hello`" at runtime as well.

What happens if we use `let`?

```typescript twoslash
let hello = "hello";
type Hello = typeof hello;
//   ^?

hello = 'Hello'
```

The `Hello` type gets
["widened"](https://mariusschulz.com/blog/literal-type-widening-in-typescript)
to the `string` type -- because now the variable can be re-assigned to any
other value of type `string` in another part of the program!

# `const` assertions

We could achieve the same effect of using `const` with a `const` assertion:

```typescript twoslash {1}
let hello = "hello" as const;
type Hello = typeof hello;
//   ^?

// @errors: 2322
hello = 'Hello'
```

We'll often use `const` assertions to prevent type widening when deriving types
from data -- i.e., avoiding a more specific (narrower) type being changed to a
more general (widened) type, such as a `0` being changed to a `number` and a
`"hello"` being changed to `string`.

# Deriving types from arrays

Suppose we have an array of strings and we want a type that is an union of the
array values.

```typescript twoslash {2}
const arr = ['foo', 'bar', 'baz'] as const
type ArrayValue = (typeof arr)[number]
//   ^?
```

The result of `typeof arr` is just an array type, the trick here is to use
`number` to index that array -- it's like saying, what are all the possible
types when I index this array by a `number`?

The `const` assertion is critical here -- if we remove it, the type gets
widened to `string`.

```typescript twoslash {1}
const arr = ['foo', 'bar', 'baz']
type ArrayValue = (typeof arr)[number]
//   ^?
```

# Deriving types from objects

Now let's try to derive our types from a object -- both getting every key or
every value.

```typescript twoslash
const obj = {
//    ^?
  foo: 1,
  bar: 2,
  baz: 3,
} as const

type ObjectKey = keyof typeof obj
//   ^?
type ObjectValue = (typeof obj)[ObjectKey]
//   ^?
```

To get the object keys, we need to use the [`keyof`
operator](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/keyof-types.html).

For the object values, we just need to index that object with all of the object
possible keys -- which makes sense!

The `const` assertion is also critical here, because otherwise the object value
types would have been widened to `number`:

```typescript twoslash
const obj = {
//    ^?
  foo: 1,
  bar: 2,
  baz: 3,
}

type ObjectKey = keyof typeof obj
//   ^?
type ObjectValue = (typeof obj)[ObjectKey]
//   ^?
```

# Deriving types from array of objects

We can combine both approaches to derive type from an array of objects:

```typescript twoslash {6}
const obj = [
  { kind: 'circle', radius: 100 },
  { kind: 'square', sideLength: 50 },
] as const

type Kind = typeof obj[number]['kind']
//   ^?
```

Commit message:

Clarify what the article is about in the beginning

src/content/posts/deriving-types-from-data-typescript/index.mdx, after:

---
title: Deriving types from data in TypeScript
date: 2023-04-02
tags: [typescript]
---

A TypeScript pattern I like to use is to derive types from data. Types in
TypeScript only exist at build time, so this pattern has the benefit of types
being automatically linked to the runtime values they represent.

Here's one example of what I mean by that:

```typescript twoslash
const options = ['OPTION_1', 'OPTION_2'] as const
type Option = (typeof options)[number]
//   ^?
```

# `typeof` operator

The heart of this pattern is the [`typeof`
operator](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/typeof-types.html#the-typeof-type-operator),
which gives us the type of a variable, for example:

```typescript twoslash
const hello = "hello";
type Hello = typeof hello;
//   ^?
```

# `const` vs `let`

The result of `typeof` will differ depending on how we declare our variable --
whether we used `const` or `let`.

As you could see, when we used `const`, the `Hello` type was the literal string
`"hello"` -- this is because a `const` variable can never be re-assigned later,
so it can only be `"hello`" at runtime as well.

What happens if we use `let`?

```typescript twoslash
let hello = "hello";
type Hello = typeof hello;
//   ^?

hello = 'Hello'
```

The `Hello` type gets
["widened"](https://mariusschulz.com/blog/literal-type-widening-in-typescript)
to the `string` type -- because now the variable can be re-assigned to any
other value of type `string` in another part of the program!

# `const` assertions

We could achieve the same effect of using `const` with a `const` assertion:

```typescript twoslash {1}
let hello = "hello" as const;
type Hello = typeof hello;
//   ^?

// @errors: 2322
hello = 'Hello'
```

We'll often use `const` assertions to prevent type widening when deriving types
from data -- i.e., avoiding a more specific (narrower) type being changed to a
more general (widened) type, such as a `0` being changed to a `number` and a
`"hello"` being changed to `string`.

# Deriving types from arrays

Suppose we have an array of strings and we want a type that is an union of the
array values.

```typescript twoslash {2}
const arr = ['foo', 'bar', 'baz'] as const
type ArrayValue = (typeof arr)[number]
//   ^?
```

The result of `typeof arr` is just an array type, the trick here is to use
`number` to index that array -- it's like saying, what are all the possible
types when I index this array by a `number`?

The `const` assertion is critical here -- if we remove it, the type gets
widened to `string`.

```typescript twoslash {1}
const arr = ['foo', 'bar', 'baz']
type ArrayValue = (typeof arr)[number]
//   ^?
```

# Deriving types from objects

Now let's try to derive our types from a object -- both getting every key or
every value.

```typescript twoslash
const obj = {
//    ^?
  foo: 1,
  bar: 2,
  baz: 3,
} as const

type ObjectKey = keyof typeof obj
//   ^?
type ObjectValue = (typeof obj)[ObjectKey]
//   ^?
```

To get the object keys, we need to use the [`keyof`
operator](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/keyof-types.html).

For the object values, we just need to index that object with all of the object
possible keys -- which makes sense!

The `const` assertion is also critical here, because otherwise the object value
types would have been widened to `number`:

```typescript twoslash
const obj = {
//    ^?
  foo: 1,
  bar: 2,
  baz: 3,
}

type ObjectKey = keyof typeof obj
//   ^?
type ObjectValue = (typeof obj)[ObjectKey]
//   ^?
```

# Deriving types from array of objects

We can combine both approaches to derive type from an array of objects:

```typescript twoslash {6}
const obj = [
  { kind: 'circle', radius: 100 },
  { kind: 'square', sideLength: 50 },
] as const

type Kind = typeof obj[number]['kind']
//   ^?
```
