content/posts/deploying-flask-app-on-heroku/index.md, before:

---
title: "Deploying a Flask app on a Heroku free dyno"
date: "2020-10-11"
tags: ["python", "flask", "heroku"]
---

tl;dr: Use
[waitress](https://docs.pylonsproject.org/projects/waitress/en/latest/) instead
of [gunicorn](https://gunicorn.org/)

```diff
diff --git a/Procfile b/Procfile
index d49e1a0..0cd38da 100644
--- a/Procfile
+++ b/Procfile
@@ -1 +1 @@
-web: gunicorn "app:create_app()"
+web: waitress-serve --port=$PORT --threads=${WEB_CONCURRENCY:-2} --call 'app:create_app'
```

Recently, I had trouble deploying a Flask application using gunicorn as the WSGI
server on a Heroku's free dyno tier.

The problem boils down to the application not restarting when the dyno is
unidling, so once it sleeps it never wakes up again, unless you force it to do
so with `heroku restart`.

From the `heroku logs`:

    2020-08-27T19:21:21.060020+00:00 heroku[web.1]: State changed from down to starting
    2020-08-27T19:21:26.527757+00:00 heroku[web.1]: Starting process with command `gunicorn "app:create_app()"`
    2020-08-27T19:21:34.069516+00:00 app[web.1]: [2020-08-27 19:21:34 +0000] [4] [INFO] Starting gunicorn 20.0.4
    2020-08-27T19:21:34.087317+00:00 app[web.1]: [2020-08-27 19:21:34 +0000] [4] [INFO] Listening at: http://0.0.0.0:3906 (4)
    2020-08-27T19:21:34.092921+00:00 app[web.1]: [2020-08-27 19:21:34 +0000] [4] [INFO] Using worker: sync
    2020-08-27T19:21:34.131957+00:00 app[web.1]: [2020-08-27 19:21:34 +0000] [10] [INFO] Booting worker with pid: 10
    2020-08-27T19:21:34.201582+00:00 app[web.1]: [2020-08-27 19:21:34 +0000] [11] [INFO] Booting worker with pid: 11
    2020-08-27T19:21:34.560508+00:00 heroku[web.1]: State changed from starting to up
    2020-08-27T19:54:54.137845+00:00 heroku[web.1]: Idling
    2020-08-27T19:54:54.139855+00:00 heroku[web.1]: State changed from up to down
    2020-08-27T19:54:59.841651+00:00 heroku[web.1]: Stopping all processes with SIGTERM
    2020-08-27T19:54:59.908237+00:00 app[web.1]: [2020-08-27 19:54:59 +0000] [11] [INFO] Worker exiting (pid: 11)
    2020-08-27T19:54:59.910662+00:00 app[web.1]: [2020-08-27 19:54:59 +0000] [4] [INFO] Handling signal: term
    2020-08-27T19:54:59.919059+00:00 app[web.1]: [2020-08-27 19:54:59 +0000] [10] [INFO] Worker exiting (pid: 10)
    2020-08-27T19:55:00.122579+00:00 app[web.1]: [2020-08-27 19:55:00 +0000] [4] [INFO] Shutting down: Master
    2020-08-27T19:55:00.223868+00:00 heroku[web.1]: Process exited with status 0

Every request would then be met with a Heroku `H10` error and 503 HTTP error.

I simply had this in my `Procfile`:

    web: gunicorn "app:create_app()"

I don't know if there's anything wrong with it or if I could have done something
to make it restart when unidling. Please let me know if that's the case.

By comparing with a node application log, the difference seems to be on how the
processes handle a `SIGTERM` signal. `node` exits with code 143 and restarts
just fine afterwards, but `gunicorn` exits with code 0 and doesn't restart
again.

I searched for a way to configure how gunicorn handles SIGTERM with no luck, but
that would be too awkward anyway.

Then I stumbled upon
[a post discouraging the use of gunicorn on Heroku](https://blog.etianen.com/blog/2014/01/19/gunicorn-heroku-django/)
and recommending
[Waitress](https://docs.pylonsproject.org/projects/waitress/en/latest/) instead.

The mentioned blog post author's reasons are much more technical than mine, I
just wanted the application to not crash. So I changed the Procfile to:

    web: waitress-serve --port=$PORT --threads=${WEB_CONCURRENCY:-2} --call 'app:create_app'

As was suggested by the
[Flask](https://flask.palletsprojects.com/en/1.1.x/tutorial/deploy/#run-with-a-production-server)
and
[Waitress documentation](https://docs.pylonsproject.org/projects/waitress/en/latest/usage.html#heroku)

Now the application restarts when unidling:

    2020-10-09T02:02:24.121855+00:00 heroku[web.1]: Idling
    2020-10-09T02:02:24.123702+00:00 heroku[web.1]: State changed from up to down
    2020-10-09T02:02:25.226026+00:00 heroku[web.1]: Stopping all processes with SIGTERM
    2020-10-09T02:02:25.317332+00:00 heroku[web.1]: Process exited with status 143
    2020-10-09T13:22:44.966887+00:00 heroku[web.1]: Unidling
    2020-10-09T13:22:44.969344+00:00 heroku[web.1]: State changed from down to starting
    2020-10-09T13:22:49.127433+00:00 heroku[web.1]: Starting process with command `waitress-serve --port=55574 --threads=${WEB_CONCURRENCY:-2} --call 'app:create_app'`

Commit message:

Huge redesign
This mainly revolved around a new homepage, in which I used the CSS grid
approach to full bleed layout, as explained in this blog post:
https://ryanmulligan.dev/blog/x-scrolling-centered-max-width-container/

content/posts/deploying-flask-app-on-heroku/index.md, after:

---
title: "Deploying a Flask app on a Heroku free dyno"
date: "2020-10-11"
tags: ["python", "flask", "heroku"]
summary: >
    The typical production-grade server used to deploy Python web apps,
    gunicorn, did not quite work for me. This post is the story of how I got it
    working.
---

tl;dr: Use
[waitress](https://docs.pylonsproject.org/projects/waitress/en/latest/) instead
of [gunicorn](https://gunicorn.org/)

```diff
diff --git a/Procfile b/Procfile
index d49e1a0..0cd38da 100644
--- a/Procfile
+++ b/Procfile
@@ -1 +1 @@
-web: gunicorn "app:create_app()"
+web: waitress-serve --port=$PORT --threads=${WEB_CONCURRENCY:-2} --call 'app:create_app'
```

Recently, I had trouble deploying a Flask application using gunicorn as the WSGI
server on a Heroku's free dyno tier.

The problem boils down to the application not restarting when the dyno is
unidling, so once it sleeps it never wakes up again, unless you force it to do
so with `heroku restart`.

From the `heroku logs`:

    2020-08-27T19:21:21.060020+00:00 heroku[web.1]: State changed from down to starting
    2020-08-27T19:21:26.527757+00:00 heroku[web.1]: Starting process with command `gunicorn "app:create_app()"`
    2020-08-27T19:21:34.069516+00:00 app[web.1]: [2020-08-27 19:21:34 +0000] [4] [INFO] Starting gunicorn 20.0.4
    2020-08-27T19:21:34.087317+00:00 app[web.1]: [2020-08-27 19:21:34 +0000] [4] [INFO] Listening at: http://0.0.0.0:3906 (4)
    2020-08-27T19:21:34.092921+00:00 app[web.1]: [2020-08-27 19:21:34 +0000] [4] [INFO] Using worker: sync
    2020-08-27T19:21:34.131957+00:00 app[web.1]: [2020-08-27 19:21:34 +0000] [10] [INFO] Booting worker with pid: 10
    2020-08-27T19:21:34.201582+00:00 app[web.1]: [2020-08-27 19:21:34 +0000] [11] [INFO] Booting worker with pid: 11
    2020-08-27T19:21:34.560508+00:00 heroku[web.1]: State changed from starting to up
    2020-08-27T19:54:54.137845+00:00 heroku[web.1]: Idling
    2020-08-27T19:54:54.139855+00:00 heroku[web.1]: State changed from up to down
    2020-08-27T19:54:59.841651+00:00 heroku[web.1]: Stopping all processes with SIGTERM
    2020-08-27T19:54:59.908237+00:00 app[web.1]: [2020-08-27 19:54:59 +0000] [11] [INFO] Worker exiting (pid: 11)
    2020-08-27T19:54:59.910662+00:00 app[web.1]: [2020-08-27 19:54:59 +0000] [4] [INFO] Handling signal: term
    2020-08-27T19:54:59.919059+00:00 app[web.1]: [2020-08-27 19:54:59 +0000] [10] [INFO] Worker exiting (pid: 10)
    2020-08-27T19:55:00.122579+00:00 app[web.1]: [2020-08-27 19:55:00 +0000] [4] [INFO] Shutting down: Master
    2020-08-27T19:55:00.223868+00:00 heroku[web.1]: Process exited with status 0

Every request would then be met with a Heroku `H10` error and 503 HTTP error.

I simply had this in my `Procfile`:

    web: gunicorn "app:create_app()"

I don't know if there's anything wrong with it or if I could have done something
to make it restart when unidling. Please let me know if that's the case.

By comparing with a node application log, the difference seems to be on how the
processes handle a `SIGTERM` signal. `node` exits with code 143 and restarts
just fine afterwards, but `gunicorn` exits with code 0 and doesn't restart
again.

I searched for a way to configure how gunicorn handles SIGTERM with no luck, but
that would be too awkward anyway.

Then I stumbled upon
[a post discouraging the use of gunicorn on Heroku](https://blog.etianen.com/blog/2014/01/19/gunicorn-heroku-django/)
and recommending
[Waitress](https://docs.pylonsproject.org/projects/waitress/en/latest/) instead.

The mentioned blog post author's reasons are much more technical than mine, I
just wanted the application to not crash. So I changed the Procfile to:

    web: waitress-serve --port=$PORT --threads=${WEB_CONCURRENCY:-2} --call 'app:create_app'

As was suggested by the
[Flask](https://flask.palletsprojects.com/en/1.1.x/tutorial/deploy/#run-with-a-production-server)
and
[Waitress documentation](https://docs.pylonsproject.org/projects/waitress/en/latest/usage.html#heroku)

Now the application restarts when unidling:

    2020-10-09T02:02:24.121855+00:00 heroku[web.1]: Idling
    2020-10-09T02:02:24.123702+00:00 heroku[web.1]: State changed from up to down
    2020-10-09T02:02:25.226026+00:00 heroku[web.1]: Stopping all processes with SIGTERM
    2020-10-09T02:02:25.317332+00:00 heroku[web.1]: Process exited with status 143
    2020-10-09T13:22:44.966887+00:00 heroku[web.1]: Unidling
    2020-10-09T13:22:44.969344+00:00 heroku[web.1]: State changed from down to starting
    2020-10-09T13:22:49.127433+00:00 heroku[web.1]: Starting process with command `waitress-serve --port=55574 --threads=${WEB_CONCURRENCY:-2} --call 'app:create_app'`
