content/posts/migrating-from-cra-to-vite/index.md, before:

---
title: "Migrating from create-react-app to Vite"
date: 2021-04-23
tags: ["javascript", "typescript"]
---

I started to learn React with `create-react-app` like everyone else, and it
really does its job well. I never had to worry too much about tooling but... it
is slow to start up.

This never bothered me too much but it's noticeable and everyone would agree it
could be better. Lately, we're witnessing projects developed to improve on this,
more noticeably [esbuild](https://github.com/evanw/esbuild) and
[Vite](https://vitejs.dev/).

I wanted to try this out and thought about migrating a small app of mine, mostly
written in Typescript, to Vite. And it was more easy than I expected.

# Initial setup

First, I installed Vite:

```sh
npm install vite
```

Updated my npm scripts:

```diff
diff --git a/package.json b/package.json
index f3307f5..32724e4 100644
--- a/package.json
+++ b/package.json
@@ -31,10 +31,10 @@
     "typescript": "^4.1.2"
   },
   "scripts": {
-    "start": "react-app-rewired start",
+    "start": "vite",
-    "build": "react-app-rewired build",
+    "build": "vite build",
     "test": "react-scripts test",
```

Next, I needed to modify my `index.html` file.
[The reasons for the following steps are explained in more detail here](https://vitejs.dev/guide/#index-html-and-project-root).

Moved my `index.html` from the `./public` folder to my project's root folder and
added a `script` tag with my JS entry point as its `src` attribute.

```diff
diff --git a/public/index.html b/index.html
similarity index 88%
rename from public/index.html
rename to index.html
index ecb0830..3abb36f 100644
--- a/public/index.html
+++ b/index.html
@@ -12,5 +12,6 @@
   <body>
     <noscript>You need to enable JavaScript to run this app.</noscript>
     <div id="root"></div>
+    <script type="module" src="/src/index.jsx"></script>
   </body>
 </html>
```

I didn't had to but if you have any `%PUBLIC_URL%` in your html file, just
replace it with `/`, as explained in the linked article.

# TypeScript setup

At this point, I couldn't get my app to run because my project used
`tsconfig.json` `include` properties to make absolute imports, which Vite didn't
understand.

The solution was simple: install a Vite plugin called
[`vite-tsconfig-paths`](https://github.com/aleclarson/vite-tsconfig-paths) which
supports, apart from
[path mapping](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/module-resolution.html#path-mapping),
`include` and `exclude` properties as well:

```sh
npm install vite-tsconfig-paths
```

Once installed, we add it to our `vite.config.ts`:

```ts
import { defineConfig } from "vite";
import tsconfigPaths from "vite-tsconfig-paths";

export default defineConfig({
  build: {
    outDir: "build"
  },
  plugins: [tsconfigPaths()]
});
```

I also set the output directory to be `build`, instead of the default `dist`,
because that's what CRA uses.

After that, I was able to start a server and see my app running.

# Jest setup

Because I intended to remove `react-scripts` from my project, I needed to figure
out how to run my Jest tests without `react-scripts test`.

I needed a way to get Jest to understand/transpile TypeScript and JSX.

Fortunately, there is project to help with that called
[`ts-jest`](https://kulshekhar.github.io/ts-jest/). All we need to do is add it
as a jest preset in `jest.config.js`:

```js
module.exports = {
  preset: "ts-jest",
  setupFilesAfterEnv: ["<rootDir>src/setupTests.ts"],
  testPathIgnorePatterns: ["<rootDir>/cypress/"],
  moduleDirectories: ["node_modules", "src"]
};
```

For my specific setup, I also needed to:

- Ignore `*.spec.js` files inside `./cypress/integration` folder
- Rename `./src/setupTests.js` to `./src/setupTests.ts`. Otherwise, types from
  the `@testing-library/jest-dom/extend-expect` wouldn't be imported.
- Add `"src"` to `moduleDirectories`, because it would not understand absolute
  imports that look up paths inside `tsconfig.json` `include` property

# Conclusion

This seems to be working fine so far, development environment is much faster to
boot, though I haven't checked how great hot reloading is.

But I'm amazed by that first experience and how straightforward it was.

Finally, I uninstalled my CRA-related dev dependencies:

```sh
npm uninstall react-scripts customize-cra react-app-rewired babel-plugin-import
```

Commit message:

Add summary to some blog posts for RSS

content/posts/migrating-from-cra-to-vite/index.md, after:

---
title: "Migrating from create-react-app to Vite"
date: 2021-04-23
tags: ["javascript", "typescript"]
summary: How and why to migrate a CRA project to Vite
---

I started to learn React with `create-react-app` like everyone else, and it
really does its job well. I never had to worry too much about tooling but... it
is slow to start up.

This never bothered me too much but it's noticeable and everyone would agree it
could be better. Lately, we're witnessing projects developed to improve on this,
more noticeably [esbuild](https://github.com/evanw/esbuild) and
[Vite](https://vitejs.dev/).

I wanted to try this out and thought about migrating a small app of mine, mostly
written in Typescript, to Vite. And it was more easy than I expected.

# Initial setup

First, I installed Vite:

```sh
npm install vite
```

Updated my npm scripts:

```diff
diff --git a/package.json b/package.json
index f3307f5..32724e4 100644
--- a/package.json
+++ b/package.json
@@ -31,10 +31,10 @@
     "typescript": "^4.1.2"
   },
   "scripts": {
-    "start": "react-app-rewired start",
+    "start": "vite",
-    "build": "react-app-rewired build",
+    "build": "vite build",
     "test": "react-scripts test",
```

Next, I needed to modify my `index.html` file.
[The reasons for the following steps are explained in more detail here](https://vitejs.dev/guide/#index-html-and-project-root).

Moved my `index.html` from the `./public` folder to my project's root folder and
added a `script` tag with my JS entry point as its `src` attribute.

```diff
diff --git a/public/index.html b/index.html
similarity index 88%
rename from public/index.html
rename to index.html
index ecb0830..3abb36f 100644
--- a/public/index.html
+++ b/index.html
@@ -12,5 +12,6 @@
   <body>
     <noscript>You need to enable JavaScript to run this app.</noscript>
     <div id="root"></div>
+    <script type="module" src="/src/index.jsx"></script>
   </body>
 </html>
```

I didn't had to but if you have any `%PUBLIC_URL%` in your html file, just
replace it with `/`, as explained in the linked article.

# TypeScript setup

At this point, I couldn't get my app to run because my project used
`tsconfig.json` `include` properties to make absolute imports, which Vite didn't
understand.

The solution was simple: install a Vite plugin called
[`vite-tsconfig-paths`](https://github.com/aleclarson/vite-tsconfig-paths) which
supports, apart from
[path mapping](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/module-resolution.html#path-mapping),
`include` and `exclude` properties as well:

```sh
npm install vite-tsconfig-paths
```

Once installed, we add it to our `vite.config.ts`:

```ts
import { defineConfig } from "vite";
import tsconfigPaths from "vite-tsconfig-paths";

export default defineConfig({
  build: {
    outDir: "build"
  },
  plugins: [tsconfigPaths()]
});
```

I also set the output directory to be `build`, instead of the default `dist`,
because that's what CRA uses.

After that, I was able to start a server and see my app running.

# Jest setup

Because I intended to remove `react-scripts` from my project, I needed to figure
out how to run my Jest tests without `react-scripts test`.

I needed a way to get Jest to understand/transpile TypeScript and JSX.

Fortunately, there is project to help with that called
[`ts-jest`](https://kulshekhar.github.io/ts-jest/). All we need to do is add it
as a jest preset in `jest.config.js`:

```js
module.exports = {
  preset: "ts-jest",
  setupFilesAfterEnv: ["<rootDir>src/setupTests.ts"],
  testPathIgnorePatterns: ["<rootDir>/cypress/"],
  moduleDirectories: ["node_modules", "src"]
};
```

For my specific setup, I also needed to:

- Ignore `*.spec.js` files inside `./cypress/integration` folder
- Rename `./src/setupTests.js` to `./src/setupTests.ts`. Otherwise, types from
  the `@testing-library/jest-dom/extend-expect` wouldn't be imported.
- Add `"src"` to `moduleDirectories`, because it would not understand absolute
  imports that look up paths inside `tsconfig.json` `include` property

# Conclusion

This seems to be working fine so far, development environment is much faster to
boot, though I haven't checked how great hot reloading is.

But I'm amazed by that first experience and how straightforward it was.

Finally, I uninstalled my CRA-related dev dependencies:

```sh
npm uninstall react-scripts customize-cra react-app-rewired babel-plugin-import
```
